Nfcore intermediate training (#448)
nextflow-io/training: docs/hello_nextflow/09_hello_nf-core.md

Additional test profiles can be created to test different parts of your pipeline.

### Template tour

The nf-core pipeline template comes packed with a lot of files and folders.

Here, we selected a subset (what we did in step 5 during the template creation).

While the template may feel overwhelming, a complete understanding isn't required to start developing your pipeline. Let's look at the important places that we need to touch during pipeline development.

#### Workflows, subworkflows, and modules

The nf-core pipeline template has a `main.nf` script that calls `myfirstpipeline.nf` from the `workflows` folder. The `myfirstpipeline.nf` file inside the workflows folder is the central pipeline file that is used to bring everything else together.

Instead of having one large monolithic pipeline script, it's broken up into smaller script components, namely, modules and subworkflows:

-   **Modules:** Wrappers around a single process
-   **Subworkflows:** Two or more modules that are packaged together as a mini workflow

<figure class="excalidraw">
--8<-- "docs/nf_develop/img/nested.excalidraw.svg"
</figure>

> Within your pipeline repository, `modules` and `subworkflows` are stored within `local` and `nf-core` folders. The `nf-core` folder is for components that have come from the nf-core GitHub repository while the `local` folder is for components that have been developed independently:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within your pipeline repository, `modules` and `subworkflows` are stored within `local` and `nf-core` folders. The `nf-core` folder is for components that have come from the nf-core GitHub repository while the `local` folder is for components that have been developed independently (usually things very specific to a pipeline):
```

Maybe?

Author: let's go with this for now. In a new iteration it could be maybe, install module, patch module, local module to make that even more obvious. But for that I think the training has to be broken up more.

!!!note

    Some nf-core modules are also split into command specific directories:

    ```console
    │
    └── <tool name>
        └── <command>
            ├── environment.yml
            ├── main.nf
            ├── meta.yml
            └── tests
                ├── main.nf.test
                ├── main.nf.test.snap
                └── tags.yml
    ```

!!!note

    The nf-core template does not come with a local modules folder by default.

#### Configuration files

The nf-core pipeline template utilizes Nextflow's flexible customization options and has a series of configuration files throughout the template.

In the template, the `nextflow.config` file is a central configuration file and is used to set default values for parameters and other configuration options. The majority of these configuration options are applied by default while others (e.g., software dependency profiles) are included as optional profiles.

There are several configuration files that are stored in the `conf` folder and are added to the configuration by default or optionally as profiles:

> -   `base.config`: A 'blank slate' config file, appropriate for general use on most high performance compute environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `base.config`: A 'blank slate' config file, appropriate for general use on most high performance compute environments. This defines broad bins of resource usage, for example, which are convenient to apply to modules.
```
?

-   `test_full.config`: A profile to run the pipeline with a full-sized test dataset.

#### `nextflow_schema.json`

The `nextflow_schema.json` is a file used to store parameter related information including type, description and help text in a machine readable format. The schema is used for various purposes, including automated parameter validation, help text generation, and interactive parameter form rendering in UI interfaces.

### Takeaway

You have an example pipeline, and learned about important files that the template comes with. 

### What's next?

Congratulations! In the next step, we will check the input data.

---

## Check the input data

Above, we said that the `test` profile comes with small test files that are stored in the nf-core. Let's check what type of files we are dealing with to plan our expansion. Remember that we can inspect any channel content by using the `dump` operator: 

```groovy title="workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf" linenums="27"
ch_samplesheet.dump()
```

and adding `-dump-channels` to the run command:

```bash
nextflow run . -profile docker,test --outdir results -dump-channels
```

> The output should look like this: We see that we have FastQ files as input and each set of files is accompanied by some metadata: the `id` and whether or not they are single end:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output should look like the below. We see that we have FastQ files as input and each set of files is accompanied by some metadata: the `id` and whether or not they are single end:
```

```console title="Output"
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE1_PE', 'single_end':false], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R2.fastq.gz]]
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE2_PE', 'single_end':false], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R2.fastq.gz]]
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE3_SE', 'single_end':true], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R1.fastq.gz]]
```

### Takeaway

> You inspected the input sample sheet channel and can use it for the next steps in the training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have learned how input data is supplied via a samplesheet.
```

<!-- <figure class="excalidraw">
    --8<-- "docs/nf_template/img/pipeline.excalidraw.svg"
</figure> -->

The `nf-core modules install` command can be used to install the `seqtk/trim` module directly from the nf-core repository:

```
nf-core modules install
```

!!!warning

    You need to be in the myorg-myfirstpipeline directory when executing `nf-core modules install`

You can follow the prompts to find and install the module you are interested in:

```console
? Tool name: seqtk/trim
```

Once selected, the tooling will install the module in the `modules/nf-core/` folder and suggest code that you can add to your main workflow file (`workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf`).

```console
INFO     Installing 'seqtk/trim'
INFO     Use the following statement to include this module:

include { SEQTK_TRIM } from '../modules/nf-core/seqtk/trim/main'
```

To enable reporting and reproducibility, modules and subworkflows from the nf-core repository are tracked using hashes in the `modules.json` file. When modules are installed or removed using the nf-core tooling the `modules.json` file will be automatically updated.

> When you open the `modules.json`, you will see an entry for each module that is currently installed from the nf-core modules repository. You can open the file with the VSCOde user interface by clicking on it in `myorg-myfirstpipeline/modules.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you open the `modules.json`, you will see an entry for each module that is currently installed from the nf-core modules repository. You can open the file with the VSCode user interface by clicking on it in `myorg-myfirstpipeline/modules.json`:
```

  outdir                    : results

Institutional config options
  config_profile_name       : Test profile
  config_profile_description: Minimal test dataset to check pipeline function

Core Nextflow options
  runName                   : drunk_waddington
  containerEngine           : docker
  launchDir                 : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline
  workDir                   : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline/work
  projectDir                : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline
  userName                  : gitpod
  profile                   : docker,test
  configFiles               : 

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (4)
[74/9b2e7b] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:SEQTK_TRIM (SAMPLE2_PE) [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
[ea/5ca001] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC                 [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-
```

### Inspect results folder

> nf-core by default, publishes the output of each process into the `<outdir>/<TOOL>`. After running the previous command, you 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Default nf-core configuration directs the output of each process into the `<outdir>/<TOOL>`. After running the previous command, you 
```

For `SEQTK_TRIM`, the `reads` output could be put into a channel named `ch_trimmed`.

```groovy title="workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf" linenums="35"
ch_trimmed  = SEQTK_TRIM.out.reads
```

Similarly, it is beneficial to immediately mix the versions of tools into the `ch_versions` channel so they can be used as an input for the `MULTIQC` process and passed to the final report, so that users can track the versions used.

```groovy title="workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf" linenums="35"
ch_versions = ch_versions.mix(SEQTK_TRIM.out.versions.first())
```

!!! note

    The `first` operator is used to emit the first item from `SEQTK_TRIM.out.versions` to avoid duplication.

### Add a parameter to the `seqtk/trim` tool

To prevent changing the nf-core modules, additional configuration options can be applied to a module using scopes within configuration files.

The configuration of modules is commonly added to the `modules.conf` file in the `conf` folder. Process selectors (e.g., `withName`) are used to apply configuration to modules selectively. Process selectors must be used within the `process` scope.

> Extra configuration may also be applied as directives by using `args`. You can find many examples of how arguments are added to modules in nf-core pipelines, for example, the nf-core/rnaseq [modules.config](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/blob/master/conf/modules.config) file.

Reviewer: Not right now ;-)

> Add this snippet to your `conf/modules.config` file to call the tool with an additional argument: `-b 5` trims 5bp from the left end of each read:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add this snippet to your `conf/modules.config` file (making sure to use the `params` scope) to call the tool with an additional argument: `-b 5` trims 5bp from the left end of each read:
```

```console title="conf/modules.config" linenums="21"
withName: 'SEQTK_TRIM' {
    ext.args = "-b 5"
}
```

Run the pipeline again and check if the new parameter is applied:

```bash
nextflow run . -profile docker,test --outdir results

[66/c12aa9] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:SEQTK_TRIM (SAMPLE1_PE) [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
[27/397ccf] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC                 [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
```

> Copy the hash, that you see in your console output (here `66/c12aa9`, it is different for _each_ run). Use tab-completion to expand the complete hash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy the hash, that you see in your console output (here `66/c12aa9`, it is different for _each_ run). You can `ls` using tab-completion in your `work` directory to expand the complete hash.
```

```bash
less work/66/c12aa9/.command.sh
```

We can see, that the parameter `-b 5`, that we set in the `modules.config` is applied to the task:

```console title="Output"
#!/usr/bin/env bash

set -e # Exit if a tool returns a non-zero status/exit code
set -u # Treat unset variables and parameters as an error
set -o pipefail # Returns the status of the last command to exit with a non-zero status or zero if all successfully execute
set -C # No clobber - prevent output redirection from overwriting files.

printf "%s\n" sample1_R1.fastq.gz sample1_R2.fastq.gz | while read f;
do
    seqtk \
        trimfq \
        -b 5 \
        $f \
        | gzip --no-name > SAMPLE1_PE_$(basename $f)
done

cat <<-END_VERSIONS > versions.yml
"MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:SEQTK_TRIM":
    seqtk: $(echo $(seqtk 2>&1) | sed 's/^.*Version: //; s/ .*$//')
END_VERSIONS
```

### Takeaway

You have now added a nf-core/module to your pipeline, configured it with a particular parameter, and made the output available in the workflow.

### What's next?

In the next step we will add a pipeline parameter to allow users to skip the trimming step.

---

## Adding parameters to your pipeline

> Parameters that can be overridden, either using the command line or the Nextflow configuration file, and should be used for anything that a pipeline user may want to configure regularly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters that can be overridden, either using the command line or the Nextflow configuration file, and should be used for anything that a pipeline user may want to configure regularly. nf-core defines some standards on how parameters are provided.
```

Just trying to tie things back to the overall theme.

🚀  Launch web builder for customization and editing? [y/n]: y
```

Using the web builder you can add add details about your new parameters.

The parameters that you have added to your pipeline will be added to the bottom of the `nf-core schema build` file. Some information about these parameters will be automatically filled based on the default value from your `nextflow.config`. You will be able to categorize your new parameters into a group, add icons, and add descriptions for each.

![Pipeline parameters](img/pipeline_schema.png)

!!!note

    Ungrouped parameters in schema will cause a warning.

Once you have made your edits you can click `Finished` and all changes will be automatically added to your `nextflow_schema.json` file.

If you rerun the previous command, the warning should disappear:

```console
nextflow run . -profile test,docker --outdir results --skip_trim

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (1)
[6c/c78d0c] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-
```

### Takeaway

> You have added a new parameter to the pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have added a new parameter to the pipeline, and learned how to use nf-core tools to describe it in the pipeline schema.
```

### What's next?

> In the next step we will take a look at how we track additional information related to an input file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next step we will take a look at how we track metadata related to an input file.
```

### What's next?

Celebrate and take another break! Next, we'll show you how to use nf-core tooling to build your own pipeline. 

## Create a basic pipeline from template

The nf-core pipeline template is a standardized framework designed to streamline the development of Nextflow-based bioinformatics pipelines.

> Creating a pipeline using the nf-core template is greatly simplified by the nf-core tooling. It will help you create a pipeline using the set framework that can be modified to suit your own purposes.

Reviewer: Maybe actually introduce the tooling (don't think we did that above). So "nf-core provides some tooling in the form of a command line utility.... yada yada yada".

Reviewer: same for template

Reviewer: Also say explicitly that we've pre-installed the tools for them

  projectDir                : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline
  userName                  : gitpod
  profile                   : docker,test
  configFiles               : 

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (1)
[ba/579181] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-
```

Let's dissect what we are seeing:

The nf-core pipeline template is a working pipeline and comes pre-configured with some modules, here we only chose MultiQC:

-   [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/): A modular tool to aggregate results from bioinformatics analyses across many samples into a single report.

!!! note "The template can be granularly configured"

    From nf-core tools 3.0 onwards many features can be removed during template creation. This is what we did when deselecting 
    features earlier.

At the top you see, all parameters displayed that differ from the pipeline defaults. These were configured with the `test` profile.

> You can use the `test` profile to check if your pipeline is still working during your development cycle. 

Reviewer: I find short stop-start sentences a bit hard to follow. Join them up a bit into a narrative?

There are several configuration files that are stored in the `conf` folder and are added to the configuration by default or optionally as profiles:

-   `base.config`: A 'blank slate' config file, appropriate for general use on most high performance compute environments.
-   `modules.config`: Additional module directives and arguments.
-   `test.config`: A profile to run the pipeline with minimal test data.
-   `test_full.config`: A profile to run the pipeline with a full-sized test dataset.

#### `nextflow_schema.json`

The `nextflow_schema.json` is a file used to store parameter related information including type, description and help text in a machine readable format. The schema is used for various purposes, including automated parameter validation, help text generation, and interactive parameter form rendering in UI interfaces.

### Takeaway

You have now created a template pipeline, and learned about important template files

### What's next?

> Congratulations! You have now created a template pipeline. In the next step, we will start adding new tools to it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You have now created an example pipeline from the template. In the next step, we will start adding new tools to it. 
```

This is what you mean, right?

Reviewer: Actuallly you check the input data in the next section

---

## Check the input data

Above, we said that the `test` profile comes with small test files that are stored in the nf-core. Let's check what type of files we are dealing with to plan our expansion. We can inspect any channel content by using the `dump` operator: 

```groovy title="workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf" linenums="27"
ch_samplesheet.dump()
```

> We can then run the pipeline with the additional argument `-dump-channels`. This will run `dump()`. It is great for development, because a normal user will not add this flag and thus not see the channel content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can then run the pipeline with the additional argument `-dump-channels`. This will run `dump()`. It is great for development, because a normal user will not add this flag and thus not see the channel content:
```

Think I saw you ask about this somewhere- feels like it lives somewhere not nf-core specific

Author: yep @kenibrewer do you time to add the dump-channels to hello-nextflow?

Author: Added to hello-nextflow in #450 and just keeping it short here. Main purpose is to check what sort of data we get

Author: reverted to `view` as discussed on slack

  projectDir                : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline
  userName                  : gitpod
  profile                   : docker,test
  configFiles               : 

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (1)
[36/084021] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE1_PE', 'single_end':false], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R2.fastq.gz]]
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE2_PE', 'single_end':false], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R2.fastq.gz]]
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE3_SE', 'single_end':true], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R1.fastq.gz]]
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-
```

### Takeaway

> You have now created a template pipeline, and learned about important template files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have now created a template pipeline, and learned about important template files
```

Again, a 'template pipeline' implies to me something you'll make other pipelines from, rather than an instance of the template, which is what we've done above.

But actually, this section was about looking at test data.

</figure> -->

The `nf-core modules install` command can be used to install the `seqtk/trim` module directly from the nf-core repository:

```
nf-core modules install
```

!!!warning

    You need to be in the myorg-myfirstpipeline directory when executing `nf-core modules install`

You can follow the prompts to find and install the module you are interested in:

```console
? Tool name: seqtk/trim
```

Once selected, the tooling will install the module in the `modules/nf-core/` folder and suggest code that you can add to your main workflow file (`workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf`).

```console
INFO     Installing 'seqtk/trim'
INFO     Use the following statement to include this module:

include { SEQTK_TRIM } from '../modules/nf-core/seqtk/trim/main'
```

To enable reporting and reproducibility, modules and subworkflows from the nf-core repository are tracked using hashes in the `modules.json` file. When modules are installed or removed using the nf-core tooling the `modules.json` file will be automatically updated.

When you open the `modules.json`, you will see an entry for each module that is currently installed from the nf-core modules repository:

> ```console

Reviewer: Maybe supply an actual command to view the content, or instruct folks to use the VSCode UI to open it?

└── seqtk
    ├── SAMPLE1_PE_sample1_R1.fastq.gz
    ├── SAMPLE1_PE_sample1_R2.fastq.gz
    ├── SAMPLE2_PE_sample2_R1.fastq.gz
    ├── SAMPLE2_PE_sample2_R2.fastq.gz
    ├── SAMPLE3_SE_sample1_R1.fastq.gz
    └── SAMPLE3_SE_sample2_R1.fastq.gz
```

The resulting files of `multiqc` and `seqtk` are published respective subdirectories. In addition, `nf-core` pipelines by default have all sorts of reporting switched on. These files are stored in the `pipeline_info` subdirectory and time-stamped so that multiple runs don't overwrite them.

### Handle modules output

As with the inputs, you can view the outputs for the module by opening the `/modules/nf-core/seqtk/trim/main.nf` file and viewing the module metadata.

```groovy title="modules/nf-core/seqtk/trim/main.nf" linenums="13"
output:
tuple val(meta), path("*.fastq.gz"), emit: reads
path "versions.yml"                , emit: versions
```

To help with organization and readability it is beneficial to create named output channels.

For `SEQTK_TRIM`, the `reads` output could be put into a channel named `ch_trimmed`.

```groovy title="workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf" linenums="35"
ch_trimmed  = SEQTK_TRIM.out.reads
```

> Similarly, it is beneficial immediately mix the versions of tools into the `ch_versions` channel so they can be used as an input for the `MULTIQC` process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, it is beneficial immediately mix the versions of tools into the `ch_versions` channel so they can be used as an input for the `MULTIQC` process and passed to the final report, so that users can track the versions used.
```

Some addition like this maybe?

```groovy title="workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf" linenums="35"
ch_versions = ch_versions.mix(SEQTK_TRIM.out.versions.first())
```

!!! note

    The `first` operator is used to emit the first item from `SEQTK_TRIM.out.versions` to avoid duplication.

### Add a parameter to the `seqtk/trim` tool

> To prevent changing the nf-core modules, additional configuration options can be applied to a module using scopes within configuration files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent changing the nf-core modules, additional configuration options can be applied to a module using scopes within configuration files.
```

This probably needs more explanation. Not sure how though

Using the web builder you can add add details about your new parameters.

The parameters that you have added to your pipeline will be added to the bottom of the `nf-core schema build` file. Some information about these parameters will be automatically filled based on the default value from your `nextflow.config`. You will be able to categorize your new parameters into a group, add icons, and add descriptions for each.

![Pipeline parameters](img/pipeline_schema.png)

!!!note

    Ungrouped parameters in schema will cause a warning.

Once you have made your edits you can click `Finished` and all changes will be automatically added to your `nextflow_schema.json` file.

If you rerun the previous command, the warning should disappear:

```console
nextflow run . -profile test,docker --outdir results --skip_trim

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (1)
[6c/c78d0c] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-
```

### Takeaway

You have added a new parameter to the pipeline.

### What's next?

> In the next step we will take a look at how we track additional information to an input file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next step we will take a look at how we track additional information related to an input file.
```

---

## Meta maps 

Datasets often have additional information that is relevant for the analysis, such as a sample name, information about sequencing protocols, or other conditions that are needed in the pipeline to process certain samples together, determine their output name, or adjust parameters.

> nf-core tracks this type of information in `meta` maps. These are `key`-`value` pairs that are passed into modules together with the files. We already saw this briefly, when inspecting the `input` for `seqtk`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By convention, nf-core tracks this type of information in `meta` maps. These are `key`-`value` pairs that are passed into modules together with the files. We already saw this briefly, when inspecting the `input` for `seqtk`:
```

        "errorMessage": "FastQ file for reads 2 cannot contain spaces and must have extension '.fq.gz' or '.fastq.gz'"
    }
},
"required": ["sample", "fastq_1"]
```

This validates that the samplesheet has at least two columns: `sample` and `fastq1` (`"required": ["sample", "fastq_1"]`). It also checks that `fastq1` and `fastq2` are files, and that the file endings match a particular pattern. 
Lastly, `sample` is information about the files that we want to attach and pass along the pipeline. nf-core uses `meta` maps for this: objects that have a key and a value. We can indicate this in the schema file directly by using the meta field:

```console 
    "sample": {
        "type": "string",
        "pattern": "^\\S+$",
        "errorMessage": "Sample name must be provided and cannot contain spaces",
        "meta": ["id"]
    },
```

This sets the key name as `id` and the value that is in the `sample` column, for example `SAMPLE1_PE`:

```console title=meta
[id: SAMPLE1_PE] 
```

By adding a new entry into the json schema, we can attach additional meta information that we want to track. This will automtically validate it for us and add it to the meta map.

> Let's add some new meta information, like the `machineid` as an optional column:

Reviewer: Why machine ID? Do you mean sequencer?

```

We have also prepared a new samplesheet, that has the `machineid` column. You can overwrite the existing input with this command:

```console
nextflow run . -profile docker,test --outdir results -dump-channels --input ../data/machineid_samplesheet.csv 
```

This populates the `machineid` and we could access it in the pipeline:

```console
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE1_PE', 'machineid':'myfavorite_machine', 'single_end':false], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R2.fastq.gz]]
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE2_PE', 'machineid':'worst_machine', 'single_end':false], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R2.fastq.gz]]
[DUMP] [['id':'SAMPLE3_SE', 'machineid':'myfavorite_machine', 'single_end':true], [/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample1_R1.fastq.gz, /nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/illumina/amplicon/sample2_R1.fastq.gz]]
```

### Use the new meta key in the pipeline

> <!-- TODO No good idea yet on what to do here -->

Reviewer: Use it to determine routing to different processes with a `branch`?

### Takeaway

You know how to adapt the samplesheet to add new meta information to your files. 

### What's next?

In the next step we will add a module that is not yet in nf-core.

---

## Create a custom module for your pipeline

nf-core offers a comprehensive set of modules that have been created and curated by the community. However, as a developer, you may be interested in bespoke pieces of software that are not apart of the nf-core repository or customizing a module that already exists.

In this instance, we will write a local module for the QC Tool [FastQE](https://fastqe.com/), which computes stats for FASTQ files and print those stats as emoji.

This section should feel familiar to the `hello_modules` section.

### Create the module

> Start by using the nf-core tooling to create a sceleton local module. It will prompt you to type in the tool name `fastqe`, for the remaining fields press `enter` to accpet the default: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by using the nf-core tooling to create a kceleton local module. It will prompt you to type in the tool name `fastqe`, for the remaining fields press `enter` to accept the default: 
```

Reviewer: Also I'd love it if we discouraged local modules and encouraged contribution to nf-core from the get-go for the benefits on testing, community input etc

Author: yeah true. I moved the note up now as the first thing.

You will notice, that it still calls `samtools` and the input are `bam`.

From our sample sheet, we know we have fastq files instead, so let's change the input definition accordingly:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="38"
tuple val(meta), path(reads)
```

The output of this tool is a tsv file with the emoji annotation, let's adapt the output as well:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="42"
tuple val(meta), path("*.tsv"), emit: tsv
```

The script section still calls `samtools`. Let's change this to the proper call of the tool:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="62"
    fastqe \\
        $args \\
        $reads \\
        --output ${prefix}.tsv
```

And at last, we need to adapt the version retrieval. This tool does not have a version command, so we will add the release number manualy:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="52"
    def VERSION = '0.3.3'
```

and write it to a file in the script section:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="70"
        fastqe: $VERSION
```

> We will not cover `stubs` in this training, but look at them at a later point. They are not necessary to run a module, so let's remove them for now and delete:

Reviewer: Link to some docs?

  userName                  : gitpod
  profile                   : docker,test
  configFiles               : 

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (1)
[ba/579181] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-
```

Let's dissect what we are seeing:

The nf-core pipeline template is a working pipeline and comes pre-configured with some modules, here we only chose MultiQC:

-   [MultiQC](https://multiqc.info/): A modular tool to aggregate results from bioinformatics analyses across many samples into a single report.

!!! note "The template can be granularly configured"

    From nf-core tools 3.0 onwards many features can be removed during template creation. This is what we did when deselecting 
    features earlier.

At the top you see, all parameters displayed that differ from the pipeline defaults. These were configured with the `test` profile.

You can use the `test` profile to check if your pipeline is still working during your development cycle. 

> The default template `test` profile leverages small test files that are stored in the nf-core [test data GitHub repository](https://github.com/nf-core/test-datasets) as inputs for the pipeline.
> 
> Additionally, the template comes with profiles for the management of software dependencies (e.g., `docker`, `singularity`, and `conda`). nf-core modules come with containers/images/recipes and profiles can be used to change the way dependencies are handled when you execute your pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default template `test` profile leverages small test files that are stored in the nf-core [test data GitHub repository](https://github.com/nf-core/test-datasets) as inputs for the pipeline.

Additionally, the template comes with profiles for managing software dependencies (e.g., `docker`, `singularity`, and `conda`). nf-core modules come with containers/images/recipes, and profiles can be used to change how dependencies are handled when you execute your pipeline.
```

```

You can comment the `view` statement for now. We will use later during this training to inspect the channel content again. 

### Takeaway

You have learned how input data is supplied via a samplesheet.

### What's next?

In the next step we will start changing the code and add new tools to the pipeline.

---

## Add an nf-core module

nf-core provides a large library of modules and subworkflows: pre-made nextflow wrappers around tools that can be installed into nextflow pipelines. They are designed to be flexible but may require additional configuration to suit different use cases. Currently, there are more than [1300 nf-core modules](https://nf-co.re/modules) and [60 nf-core subworkflows](https://nf-co.re/subworkflows) (November 2024) available. Modules and subworkflows can be listed, installed, updated, removed, and patched using nf-core tooling. 

While you could develop a module for this tool independently, you can save a lot of time and effort by leveraging nf-core modules and subworkflows.

Let's see which modules are there:

```console
nf-core modules list remote
```

> This command lists all currently available modules, > 1300. An easier way to find them, is to go to the nf-core website and visit the modules subpage [https://nf-co.re/modules](https://nf-co.re/modules). Here you can search for modules by name or tags, find documentation for each module and which nf-core pipeline uses it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This command lists all currently available modules, > 1300. An easier way to find them is to go to the nf-core website and visit the modules subpage [https://nf-co.re/modules](https://nf-co.re/modules). Here you can search for modules by name or tags, find documentation for each module and which nf-core pipeline uses it:
```

╶─────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────╴
  *.fastq.gz  (file)  │Filtered FastQ files                                            │*.{fastq.gz}
╶─────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────╴
 versions             │                                                                │
╶─────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────╴
  versions.yml  (file)│File containing software versions                               │versions.yml
                      ╵                                                                ╵

 Use the following statement to include this module:

 include { SEQTK_TRIM } from '../modules/nf-core/seqtk/trim/main'
```

Using this module information you can work out what inputs are required for the `SEQTK_TRIM` process:

1.  `tuple val(meta), path(reads)`

    -   A tuple with a meta _map_ and a list of FASTQ _files_
    -   The channel `ch_samplesheet` used by the `FASTQC` process can be used as the reads input.

> As only one input channel required, and it already exists, it can be added to your `firstpipeline.nf` file without any additional channel creation or modifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only one input channel is required, and it already exists, so it can be added to your `firstpipeline.nf` file without any additional channel creation or modifications.
```

The `nextflow_schema.json` file can get very big and very complicated very quickly.

The `nf-core pipelines schema build` command is designed to support developers write, check, validate, and propose additions to your `nextflow_schema.json` file.

```console
nf-core pipelines schema build
```

It will enable you to launch a web builder to edit this file in your web browser rather than trying to edit this file manually.

```console
INFO     [✓] Default parameters match schema validation
INFO     [✓] Pipeline schema looks valid (found 20 params)
✨ Found 'params.skip_trim' in the pipeline config, but not in the schema. Add to pipeline schema? [y/n]: y
INFO     Writing schema with 21 params: 'nextflow_schema.json'
🚀  Launch web builder for customization and editing? [y/n]: y
```

Using the web builder you can add add details about your new parameters.

> The parameters that you have added to your pipeline will be added to the bottom of the `nf-core schema build` file. Some information about these parameters will be automatically filled based on the default value from your `nextflow.config`. You will be able to categorize your new parameters into a group, add icons, and add descriptions for each.

Author: yes, good catch. I only corrected the command itself

!!!note

    Ungrouped parameters in schema will cause a warning.

Once you have made your edits you can click `Finished` and all changes will be automatically added to your `nextflow_schema.json` file.

If you rerun the previous command, the warning should disappear:

```console
nextflow run . -profile test,docker --outdir results --skip_trim

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (1)
[6c/c78d0c] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-
```

### Takeaway

You have added a new parameter to the pipeline, and learned how to use nf-core tools to describe it in the pipeline schema.

### What's next?

In the next step we will take a look at how we track metadata related to an input file.

---

## Meta maps

Datasets often contain additional information relevant to the analysis, such as a sample name, information about sequencing protocols, or other conditions needed in the pipeline to process certain samples together, determine their output name, or adjust parameters.

> By convention, nf-core tracks this type of information in `meta` maps. These are `key`-`value` pairs that are passed into modules together with the files. We already saw this briefly, when inspecting the `input` for `seqtk`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By convention, nf-core tracks this information as `meta` maps. These are `key`-`value` pairs that are passed into modules together with the files. We already saw this briefly when inspecting the `input` for `seqtk`:
```

```groovy title="modules/nf-core/seqtk/trim/main.nf" linenums="11"
input:
tuple val(meta), path(reads)
```

> If we uncomment our earlier `view` statement and run the pipeline again, we can take a look at the current content of the `meta` maps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we uncomment our earlier `view` statement and run the pipeline again, we can see the current content of the `meta` maps:
```

```console

> [[id:SAMPLE1_PE, sequencer:[], single_end:false], ....]

Author: note to fix: c&p error, this should still be original meta map

```

> You can add any field, that you like to the `meta` map. By default, nf-core modules expect an `id` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add any field that you require to the `meta` map. By default, nf-core modules expect an `id` field.
```

### Takeaway

You know that a `meta` map is used to pass along additional information for a sample.

### What's next?

In the next step we will take a look how we can add a new key to the `meta` map using the samplesheet.

---

## Simple Samplesheet adaptations

nf-core pipelines typically use samplesheets as inputs to the pipelines. This allows us to:

>     - validate each entry and print specific error messages
>     - attach information to each input file
>     - track which datasets are processed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - validate each entry and print specific error messages.
    - attach information to each input file.
    - track which datasets are processed.
```

> Samplesheets are comma-separated text files with a header row specifying the column names, followed by one entry per row. For example, the samplesheet that we have been using during this session looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Samplesheets are comma-separated text files with a header row specifying the column names, followed by one entry per row. For example, the samplesheet that we have been using during this teaching module looks like this:
```

[f1/e8d6fa] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:FASTQE (SAMPLE1_PE)     [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
[2a/a742ae] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC                 [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
```

### Takeaway

You know how to adapt the samplesheet to add new meta information to your files.

### What's next?

In the next step we will add a module that is not yet in nf-core.

---

## Create a custom module for your pipeline

nf-core offers a comprehensive set of modules that have been created and curated by the community. However, as a developer, you may be interested in bespoke pieces of software that are not apart of the nf-core repository or customizing a module that already exists.

In this instance, we will write a local module for the QC Tool [FastQE](https://fastqe.com/), which computes stats for FASTQ files and print those stats as emoji.

This section should feel familiar to the `hello_modules` section.

### Create the module

!!! note "New module contributions are always welcome and encouraged!"

    If you have a module that you would like to contribute back to the commmunity, reach out on the nf-core slack or open a pull request to the modules repository.

> Start by using the nf-core tooling to create a kceleton local module. It will prompt you to type in the tool name `fastqe`, for the remaining fields press `enter` to accept the default:

Reviewer 2: I had a feeling an error is thrown if the module already exists. I'm not sure if this is still the case but it might be worth noting if it is.

Author: good point! Added a warning

You will notice, that it still calls `samtools` and the input are `bam`.

From our sample sheet, we know we have fastq files instead, so let's change the input definition accordingly:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="38"
tuple val(meta), path(reads)
```

The output of this tool is a tsv file with the emoji annotation, let's adapt the output as well:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="42"
tuple val(meta), path("*.tsv"), emit: tsv
```

The script section still calls `samtools`. Let's change this to the proper call of the tool:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="62"
    fastqe \\
        $args \\
        $reads \\
        --output ${prefix}.tsv
```

And at last, we need to adapt the version retrieval. This tool does not have a version command, so we will add the release number manualy:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="52"
    def VERSION = '0.3.3'
```

and write it to a file in the script section:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="70"
        fastqe: $VERSION
```

> We will not cover [`stubs`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#stub) in this training, but look at them at a later point. They are not necessary to run a module, so let's remove them for now and delete:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will not cover [`stubs`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#stub) in this training. They are not necessary to run a module, so let's remove them for now:
```

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="74"
stub:
    def args = task.ext.args ?: ''
    def prefix = task.ext.prefix ?: "${meta.id}"
    // TODO nf-core: A stub section should mimic the execution of the original module as best as possible
    //               Have a look at the following examples:
    //               Simple example: https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/818474a292b4860ae8ff88e149fbcda68814114d/modules/nf-core/bcftools/annotate/main.nf#L47-L63
    //               Complex example: https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/818474a292b4860ae8ff88e149fbcda68814114d/modules/nf-core/bedtools/split/main.nf#L38-L54
    """
    touch ${prefix}.bam

    cat <<-END_VERSIONS > versions.yml
    "${task.process}":
        fastqe: \$(samtools --version |& sed '1!d ; s/samtools //')
    END_VERSIONS
    """
```

### Include the module into the pipeline

> The module is now ready in your `modules/local` folder, but not yet included into the pipeline. Similar to `seqtk/trim` we need to add it to `workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The module is now ready in your `modules/local` folder, but not yet included in your pipeline. Similar to `seqtk/trim` we need to add it to `workflows/myfirstpipeline.nf`:
```

Input/output options
  input                     : https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nf-core/test-datasets/viralrecon/samplesheet/samplesheet_test_illumina_amplicon.csv
  outdir                    : results

Institutional config options
  config_profile_name       : Test profile
  config_profile_description: Minimal test dataset to check pipeline function

Core Nextflow options
  runName                   : marvelous_saha
  containerEngine           : docker
  launchDir                 : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline
  workDir                   : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline/work
  projectDir                : /workspace/gitpod/hello-nextflow/hello-nf-core/myorg-myfirstpipeline
  userName                  : gitpod
  profile                   : docker,test
  configFiles               :

!! Only displaying parameters that differ from the pipeline defaults !!
------------------------------------------------------
executor >  local (1)
[ba/579181] process > MYORG_MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MYFIRSTPIPELINE:MULTIQC [100%] 1 of 1 ✔
-[myorg/myfirstpipeline] Pipeline completed successfully-

> ```

Author: Odd, I can't reproduce. Do you mind me merging and then testing this out again on the devcontainer that we will use for the training?

    def VERSION = '0.3.3'
```

and write it to a file in the script section:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="70"
        fastqe: $VERSION
```

We will not cover [`stubs`](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#stub) in this training. They are not necessary to run a module, so let's remove them for now:

```groovy title="modules/local/fastqe.nf" linenums="74"
stub:
    def args = task.ext.args ?: ''
    def prefix = task.ext.prefix ?: "${meta.id}"
    // TODO nf-core: A stub section should mimic the execution of the original module as best as possible
    //               Have a look at the following examples:
    //               Simple example: https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/818474a292b4860ae8ff88e149fbcda68814114d/modules/nf-core/bcftools/annotate/main.nf#L47-L63
    //               Complex example: https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/818474a292b4860ae8ff88e149fbcda68814114d/modules/nf-core/bedtools/split/main.nf#L38-L54
    """
    touch ${prefix}.bam

    cat <<-END_VERSIONS > versions.yml
    "${task.process}":
        fastqe: \$(samtools --version |& sed '1!d ; s/samtools //')
    END_VERSIONS
    """
```

> 

Author: let's remove stubs here as well
